As a global community of lower extremity health professionals [1], we believe critical practices grounded in first principles are necessary for the provision of effective care. Best practices enable a new and better standard of care. We no longer accept treating symptoms without addressing root causes to be an acceptable standard of care. By endorsing these best practices, you agree with the best practices and are helping us build consensus.
This document is for professionals who treat lower extremity dysfunction and for those who aspire to become effective lower extremity health professionals. It includes up to date consensus best practices for preventing and resolving lower extremity dysfunction. We believe six critical practices serve as a gold standard for effective care and we achieve consensus by professional endorsement. 

We define health professional as an individual whose primary profession is helping others restore natural function and we define the lower extremity as a subsystem of the body which includes the hip, thigh, knee, leg, ankle and foot. We define natural function as strong, stable, mobile, resilient and free of longstanding pain. We assert that if the desired outcome is natural lower extremity function, the body must be protected from unnatural behaviours and exposed to natural behaviours [2]. 
As a community of aligned health professionals, we apply best practices in our own lives and focus our approach  around helping individuals restore natural function. Reduction of pain is a natural by-product of improved function and not the focus of our approach. Best practices include functional assessments [3], footwear education [4] and guidance on making sustainable lifestyle changes. 

We have an opportunity as a global community of health professionals to establish a new standard of excellence and move beyond the current status quo of treating symptoms without addressing root causes. These critical practices are enable us to effectively help people restore a healthy lower body. These are consensus best practices. We build consensus through professional endorsement. Any professional who endorses this paper agrees with best practices, applies them in their life and integrates them into their practice.

If you are a health professional and agree with these best practices, please consider endorsing them by visiting www.runningapollo.com/endorse. If you disagree with them, please consider participating in a quarterly roundtable discussion with fellow professionals to share your disagreement. Best practices are reviewed and updated quarterly.
