If we want to be taken seriously as health professionals, we need to step up our game. Establishing best practices is 

Best Practices are essential for reclaiming a reputation of competence and effectiveness

When you need a dentist, you can assume a level of baseline competence and effectiveness. 

You can assume that the dentist follows some foundational best practices that were taught in school

An example of this would be for a dentist to observe and image before they intervene (so they know what should be done)

Dentists recommend an annual check up and daily brushing. An annual visit to screen for potential issues that are starting. Daily brushing to prevent issues from developing

That recommendation is widely accepted and practiced, and that is simply for our teeth. What about the rest of the body?

Lower extremity health professionals would be wise to recommend an annual screen and a daily movement practice to prevent issues from developing  

Effective dentists educate about unnatural foods that cause cavities and advise patients to avoid them

Effective lower extremity health professionals must equally educate about unnatural inputs that cause dysfunction and advise petients to avoid them

Best practice: recommend an annual movement screen by a pro and daily movement hygiene










Best practices:
1.  Movement educatio
2.  Footwear education
3.  Pain education
4.  Mindset education
5.  Movement screens

---
---

1. Movement education

- foundational education about the importance of natural movement
- the dangers and consequences of prolonged chair sitting
- time on the ground

formerly chairs/ chair audit

Screen: handsfree sit and rise. Provide prompts, scoring

education around chair sitting

audit to quantify chair time

plan to reduce chair sitting over time and replace it with time on the ground

review amount of time someone spends chair sitting

eduction around restrictions caused by chair sitting

danger is the dose not the position

audit: measure amount of chair sitting

plan to reduce chair sitting time

replace chair sitting with time on the ground


---
---
5. Screens

The resting squat is a beautiful master screen for pelvic control, hip mobility, hip stability, ankle mobility and foot function. You can’t cheat it and it serves as a brutally honest measure of lower body capacity and foundational movement capacity.

Squat: beginning from a standing position, barefoot with feet hip width apart and parallel, slowly lower down into a resting squat position and stay there for 30 seconds

To walk on two legs you need to be able to balance on one. Poor balance leads to reduced mobility, increased risk of injury and increased joint stress. Balance is easy to take for granted but it’s super important and for many people, is severely degraded because of chair use.  

Balance screen: barefoot on a flat, hard surface, stand on 1 leg and balance for 60 seconds while counting the number or errors made. If that is doable, do the same thing with eyes closed. 

These screens are simple to explain and do and it’s very hard to cheat or compensate to hide deficits. 

There is no good or bad score on a screen, there is only reality and a starting point. Doesn’t matter how you do, what matters is what you do to address deficits that the screen showed you. 

We plan to offer screens in store to every customer that walks in. We also hope everyone who reads this screens themselves, family members, friends and if you’re a pro, screen every patient and client you work with. 

How to address restrictions and deficits is the topic for another day. 
