WHY are screens useful? Because they uncover hidden deficits that can be corrected before they cause problems

HOW do screens uncover hidden deficits? Because they are honest measures of functional capacity that cannot be cheated with compensatory patterns

WHAT is a screen? A simple movement assessment tool that is hard to cheat, highly informative and makes invisible deficits visible


The two highly useful screens that tell us virtually everything we need to know about someone’s lower body capacity are the resting squat and single leg balance test.



---
---
---

RAW:
The resting squat is a beautiful master screen for pelvic control, hip mobility, hip stability, ankle mobility and foot function. You can’t cheat it and it serves as a brutally honest measure of lower body capacity and foundational movement capacity.

Squat: beginning from a standing position, barefoot with feet hip width apart and parallel, slowly lower down into a resting squat position and stay there for 30 seconds

To walk on two legs you need to be able to balance on one. Poor balance leads to reduced mobility, increased risk of injury and increased joint stress. Balance is easy to take for granted but it’s super important and for many people, is severely degraded because of chair use.  

Balance screen: barefoot on a flat, hard surface, stand on 1 leg and balance for 60 seconds while counting the number or errors made. If that is doable, do the same thing with eyes closed. 

These screens are simple to explain and do and it’s very hard to cheat or compensate to hide deficits. 

There is no good or bad score on a screen, there is only reality and a starting point. Doesn’t matter how you do, what matters is what you do to address deficits that the screen showed you. 

We plan to offer screens in store to every customer that walks in. We also hope everyone who reads this screens themselves, family members, friends and if you’re a pro, screen every patient and client you work with. 

How to address restrictions and deficits is the topic for another day. 
