Abstract. 

A simple and effective foot health protocol would allow individuals to restore natural foot health without relying on experts who are trained to treat symptoms without addressing the root cause of dysfunction.

The protocol offers a peer validated approach that can be applied by professionals who aspire to deliver effective foot health guidance to those they serve. 

90% of shod humans currently wear shoes that deform, disable and damage their feet, and 75% develop foot issues over the course of a lifetime.

We propose a solution to the problem by using peer validated proof of work software grounded in first prinicples that can be easily applied by any individual.

This protocol seeks to update our collective understanding of human feet and present a radical approach for preventing and resolving foot dysfunction. 

It is our assertion that the ultimate form of healthcare is accepting responsibility for aligning our behaviours with our biology.

In order to reclaim responsibility for their well being, individuals require truthful and effective behavioural software which they can apply in their own lives.

While the protocol will be applied in varying ways, we believe a low time preference, eliminating unnatural footwear, and a consistent daily session are fundamental requirements to restore healthy feet and a resilient, functional lower body.

--

OLD:

simple, effective lower body protocol would allow individuals to reclaim responsibility for taking care of their feet without depending on professionals who have been trained to treat symptoms of foot dysfunction without addressing the root cause. 

A paradigm shift is currently underway in how we think of health broadly and foot health specifically. Instead of simply diagnosing problems and treating symptoms (disease care), professionals are beginning to help their patients and clients take better care of themselves (healthcare). 

This shift is a much needed change to help us move towards better health. Optimal health is the output of exposing our bodies to natural behaviours that align with our biology. 

Within the domain of foot health, it is the duty of care and responsibility of health professionals to protect those they serve from the harmful effects of unnatural footwear. 

By increasing awareness, respecting first principles, focusing on the essentials and designing aligned incentives, we have an opportunity to prevent and resolve the vast majority of foot dysfunction. 



