9. APPLICATION

Apollo is behavioural software for human hardware that optimizes strength, stability, resilience and adaptability of human feet.

The protocol offers a simple behavioural framework of fundamentals and must be applied by individuals in order to be effective.

The expression "Running Apollo" is a tribute to the infamous twitter post "Running Bitcoin" made by Bitcoin legend Hal Finney to indicate he was running the Bitcoin software.

Our hope is that individuals don't blindly trust that the protocol is effective, but instead run the software and validate it for themselves.

Widespread peer validation is necessary to strengthen consensus that Apollo is an effective path to healthier feet and a more resilient lower body.


Knowledge refers to the acquisition of information and facts, while wisdom involves the application of knowledge along with experience, insight and good judgement. 

Knowlefge of the core elements is essential and wisdom is required for effective application.

The three core elements of Apollo: time preference, reduction of unnatural inputs, addition of natural inputs.

All core elements must be included for effectiveness but application will vary greatly and should always be individualized

While a 55 year old woman with bunions will apply the protocol differently than a professional athlete seekng to optimize performance and durability, they must both include and respect the core protocol elements for optimal results. 

By lowering our time preference, eliminating unnatural inpouts and consistently adding natural inputs to our daily behaviours, we have all the required ingredients for progress.


What we choose to wear on our feet and what we do in our daily session matter much less than the fact that we aren’t wearing unnatural shoes and that we are showing up everyday to do something that offers our body natural inputs.


For successful long term application of the protocol, we refer readers to understand and apply the Fogg behaviour model. 

Developed by renowned behaviour design scientist, the model states that for a behaviour to occurr, three elements must converge: motivation, ability and prompt.

Understanding the recipe for consistent behaviours empowers us to modify protocol application to ensure long ter consistency and success.


Trimmed:

- While effectiveness requires these core elements, applications of the protocol will and should vary widely and optimal application requires wisdom.
- A physiotherapist will apply the protocol differently than a footwear manufacturer. 
- A strength coach will apply the protocol differently than a podiatrist. 
- Two podiatrists might also apply the protocol very differently from each other and the same podiatrist may apply the protocol in radically different ways with different patients.

- This protocol consists of 3 simple elements. The first element is to adopt a long term mindset, focus on inputs and trust the process of adaptation. The second element is to eliminate unnatural footwear and choose to wear natural footwear when we want to protect our feet. The third element is to adopt a daily practice of at least 10 minutes which includes elements of reconditioning, balance training, squat restoration and time on the ground. This simple protocol ensures a robust array of natural inputs that will recalibrate the lower body over time and facilitate the prevention and resolution of foot dysfunction. 

- Knowledge of Apollo is useless unless the software is applied.

- consistently showing up for a daily upgrade session, we have all of the requires ingredients. 







