Resolving foot pain has come to rely almost exclusively on disease care experts serving as trusted authorities to diagnose and treat problems. 

With 75% of shod individuals suffering from foot pain at some point in their lives, the ineffectiveness of ignoring the root cause of problems becomes very obvious.

Disease care incentivizes a palliative approach which focuses on short term symptom mitigation while ignoring unnatural footwear as a root cause of foot dysfunction. 


The word radical comes the Latin word radicalis which meant "relating to a root". 

In our context, radical signifies a reversion back to first principles and focusing on the root cause of foot dysfunction. 

Radical also makes reference to the fact that a simple, first principles approach is a radical shift from our current paradigm of complex, ineffective treatments that offer short term benefits while ignoring long term unintended negative consequences. 

Treating symptoms of disease while ignoring the root cause is no longer meeting a reasonable standard of care.


We trust that credentialed professionals are competent in providing help but fail to acknowledge that the their competency is in techniques that are now outdated and ineffective in achieving positive health outcomes in the long term. 

What is needed is an empowering, action oriented protocol based in first principles of biology instead of trust in a disease care system that no longer serves us well.


Our feet abide by the same first principles of physiology as any other body part yet they are currently treated in a fundamentally different way. 

If the natural default state of the human body is to be free of dysfunction and longstanding pain, why then do 75%+ of shod people develop foot pain over the course of their life? 

If the body is self healing and self organizing, the only answer to this problem is that unnatural inputs are disrupting the healthy biology we are each given at birth. 

Armed with a basic understanding of foot function, and the observation that 99% of modern humans are wearing unnatural footwear, it becomes painfully obvious why so many people develop issues with their feet. 

As a community of health professionals, it's our duty to do better and to protect our patients from the harmful effects of unnatural footwear instead of simply treating the symptoms created by shoes that disrespect our biology.
