7. FOOTWEAR

“a problem well-defined is a problem half-solved”

The clothing we use to cover our feet is the primary influence on our foot health

With awareness and understanding that unnatural footwear is the primary cause of foot dysfunction, individuals are empowered to implement an immediate solution. 

By reducing time spent in unnatural footwear, eliminatng the primary source of unnatural inputs, our biology immediately begins to heal and recalibrate.

A 10 minute walk around the block is a great start

If you want healthy feet, reduce time in shoes that offer artificial support, inihibit motion of your foot joints, or elevate your heel.

Footwear is clothing humans initially wore on their feet to protect them from potential environmental dangers like sharp objects or temperature extremes. 

Today, footwear has become largely a fashion consideration and the unnatural shoes that 95% of people wear are disabling, deforming and damaging their feet. 

In contrast to these unnatural shoes, natural footwear respects the shape and function of our feet and should be recommended as the primary tool to prevent and resolve foot dysfunction. 

Simply put, wearing unnatural footwear weakens, deforms and disables our feet. Wearing natural footwear protects our feet while respecting our biology. 

Human feet are naturally widest at the toes, mobile and loaded with sensory nerves which exist to perceive the ground below us. 

Natural footwear protects our feet while honouring their shape and function. 

Our heuristic for identifying natural footwear is the five F’s: Foot shaped, flexible, flat, feel (thin sole), and fixed (ie not flip flops). 

In contrast, unnatural footwear is pointed, rigid, ramped, has a thick sole and may not be fixed to our foot. 


The shoes we choose to wear have profound impacts on our foot health, movement patterns and the function of our entire lower body system. 

Until we view the foot as an important and adaptable structure, we have little reason to pay attention to them or to consider the effects that our footwear might be having on the health and function of our feet. 

If we aspire to prevent and resolve foot problems, we need to begin using our feet as they are adapted to be used. 

Eliminating unnatural footwear and choosing to wear natural footwear that respects the function of our biology is the first step to restoring strong, healthy feet.


RAW
- 

