4. FIRST PRINCIPLES

The protocol we propose begins wirth biological axioms that we know with certainty to be true. 

Similar to laws of physics, fundamental laws of biology impose a non-negotiable reality onto us and must be respected.

By understanding how the human body adapts to the inputs it receives, individuals become empowered to live in alignment with their biology and optimize health. 


Our guiding axioms in human physiology are the assumptions that the human body is self healing, self organizing and adapts specifically to the demands we place upon it. 

The human body is an adaptive system that strictly optimizes for effieiciency.

This principle applies globally to all body systems, including the lower extremity.

If we spend prolonged periods of time sitting in chairs, our body will optimize for chair sitting regardless of the movement consequences of that optimization.

For muscles to get stronger, they must be exposed to load. For joints to remain mobile, they must be exposed to motion. 

For our balance to improve, it must be challenged. 

Our human hardware isn't designed to wear shoes that compromise function and damage our feet. 

Remove the problem and things begin getting better. 

Change the inputs and biology will adapt accordingly to the new signals.

If our desired outcome is natural foot function (defined as strong, stable, mobile, resilient feet that are free of longstanding pain), we must expose our bodies to natural inputs. 


The output of wearing shoes that are stiff, supportive and pointed is a foot that is stiff, weak and deformed. 

The output of wearing shoes that are flexible, flat and foot shaped is a foot that is mobile, strong and naturally shaped. 

Thinking from first principles allows us to consider long term unintended consequences that result from the disease care approach of optimizing solely around pain reduction. 


Returning to first principles enables a return to effectiveness. 

If we want to restore natural foot function, we must eliminate unnatural inputs and allow our bodies to adapt accordingly.  

By using this axiom as a lens through which to view foot health, we are able to orient our efforts around the elimination of unnatural inputs and the addition of natural inputs in order to restore the body back to it's natural, healthy settings.



OLD:

- Just like the laws of physics don’t care about our opinions, the laws of biology also don’t care about our opinions. 

- Ignoring the laws of biology always comes at a consequences, many of which materialize over longer periods of time and often not in the same region of the body in which the laws were violated. 

- By reasoning from indisputable first principles we know to be true, we honour the natural laws of biology. 

- In engineering terms, we are an adaptive system that optimizes for efficiency. 





