A paradigm shift refers to a fundamental change in prevailing viewpoints or practices. 

It's the result of a complete transformation in the underlying assumptions, theories and methodology that guide a field of work. By challenging outdated frameworks and ineffective treatment methods, we’re invited to explore new ways of thinking and novel ways of approaching problems.


Today's predominant system of disease care revolves around the diagnosis of disease and treatment of symptoms. 

Disease care professionals are trained and financially incentivized to treat symptoms without addressing the root cause of dysfunction. 

Even with good people and good intentions, this system is disempowering, myopically focused on short term suppression of symptoms, and built on a framework of financial incentives that reward intervention instead of positive long term health outcomes. 

While many professionals working in disease care view themselves as healthcare professionals, the truth is that disease care has nothing to do with health and disease care professionals are in fact not trained to address root causes while being financially dis-incentivized to help patients heal.


Time preference is a term from economics used to describe the relative value we place on the present moment versus the future. 

Someone with a high time preference cares more about the present than the future and someone with a low time preference prioritizes the future over the present moment. 

For example, when offered a drug that will reduce pain in the short term but will create more problems in the long term, someone with high time preference will choose to feel better right now regardless of the long term consequences whereas someone with a low time preference will accept feeling less comfortable in the present moment in order to have a better long term outcome. 

Disease care has a high time preference bias. 

Disease care offers interventions that manage symptoms in the short term while creating unintended negative consequences in the long term. 

A blind spot about long term consequences is created because research measures short term effects while rarely (if ever) measuring long term issues that are created.


Improving one's health is a long term endeavour that requires a low time preference. 

Being healthy requires us to forfeit the donut today in order to have better health tomorrow. 

It requires us to forfeit the pain medication today so we can continue receiving the crucial feedback loop of pain and engage with the process of rebuilding capacity. 

The paradigm shift from disease care to health care is fundamentally a return to low time preference thinking and the adoption of a long term mindset. 

In contrast to disease care, health care revolves around education and empowering individuals to take better care of themselves. 

By helping people understand the root cause of problems and offering effective guidance, healthcare empowers individuals to reclaim responsibility for their well being by enabling them to make lifestyle choices that support better health. 

Healthcare places primary responsibility back on the patient/client, who are the only ones capable of making better daily decisions.


Disease care creates dependence on "experts" who must intervene with short term measures to ease pain which comes at the expense of long term health. 

Health care fosters independence by offering individuals an increased ability to respond effectively to the challenges they face. 

Instead of focusing on pain, the objective is to improve long term function and resilience while understanding that pain is our most powerful guide along the process of healing. 

In our instant gratification culture, disease care appeases to our desire to take shortcuts and to feel better today regardless of consequences that may come tomorrow. 

Health care is a return to rational discipline and asks us to prioritize the future over the present moment. 

Health is a long term endeavor and requires a long term mindset if we are to meaningfully improve our well being. 

Focusing on eliminating the root cause of problems instead of simply treating the symptoms is a return to effectiveness. 

Helping people take better care of themselves requires us to educate our patients about eliminating unnatural inputs causing issues and reincorporating natural inputs that nudge our bodies to adapt back to default, healthy settings.

