2. AWARENESS

Awareness that taking care of ourselves is the ultimate form of Healthcare

Awareness of fundamental principles that govern how our bodies adapt

Awareness that treating symptoms of disease has nothing to do with health.

Awareness that normalizing unnatural shoes and chair sitting has direct consequences for the health and function of our lower body.

Awareness that our lower body is an integrated system and any interventions of isolated components will results in long term unintended systemic consequences.

Awareness that lower body health is accessible to individuals and incredibly simple.

Awareness that caring for our biology is a much better path than neglecting our bodies and waiting for it to break down.

Awareness that responsibility is the path to well being and trusting disease care experts carries significant risk. 








OLD:

“out of sight, out of mind”

Because feet constantly covered with shoes it’s easy to lose touch with the importance, and complexity of our feet let alone care for them. 

While feet are essential sensors for efficient locomotion, they remain grossly misunderstood by individuals and health professionals alike. 

Each foot contains 26 bones, 33 joints each with 6 degrees of freedom and in the arch of the foot alone, there are 10 muscles and 4 layers of tissue. 

Nature doesn't make mistakes and the level of complexity tells us that our feet are designed to be dynamic and capable of highly complex patterns of motion. 

As Leonardo da Vinci once said, “the human foot is a masterpiece of engineering and a work of art”. 


Everything begins with awareness ansd to fully understand a problem is to know what to do about it.

Doing something about a problem that is not fully understood is inviting chaos and unintended consequence. 

In order to remain mobile, the articulations must articulate and in order to remain strong, the muscles must be loaded.

By observing that 95% of shod people wear shoes that damage their feet and understanding 75% of people develop foot issues over the course of a lifetime, our cultural blind spot around feet becomes glaringly obvious.

It’s time to bring our appreciation of feet into alignment with their importancfe and to upgrade our understanding.

As the physical foundation for our bodies and our primary tactile sensor for the world we move upon, feet are a crucially important structure of the human form. 

To neglect our feet is to neglect the very foundation we stand on and require for movement independence.

Simply ask someone suffering from debilitating foot pain how important feet are and they will tell you that it’s easy to ignore feet until they stop working and we have our primary means of transportation and movement independence taken from us. 


Beyond expanding awareness that feet are important, it's time to acknowledge that we currently have a disease care system that is being mislabeled as healthcare. 

Diagnosing disease and treating symptoms without addressing the root cause has nothing to do with health and is not healthcare. 

In order to remain relevant, professionals must do better and individuals should expect better from those who serve them. 


Awareness that the footwear we choose to wear is the primary determinant of our foot health is essential. 

Awareness that excessive chair sitting time is causing adaptations that harm our lower body function over time.

Without understanding the impact our footwear choices have on our foot health, it’s impossible for us to make wise choices and take care of our feet.


Efficiency means doing things right. 

Effectiveness means doing the right things. 

Many people are investing time, money and energy into improving their foot health but few people are being effective. 

Effectiveness in preventing and resolving foot dysfunction comes from consistently applying 3 core elements and by doing so, the lower body receives correct inputs that facilitate a restoration of natural health and function. 

By understanding and applying these 3 essential elements, we become empowered to prevent and resolve 99% of foot problems. 

By adopting a long term mindset, protecting ourselves from footwear & chairs and incorporating a consistent daily session, we gain the ability to respond to any foot challenges we may encounter. 

We become empowered to take responsibility for our foot health.


Helping individuals reduce unnatural inputs while increasing natural inputs is the work of the effective healthcare professional. 

Through this paper we seek to present this education framework as a new gold standard in foot health education and a template that can be adopted by health professionals in all domains to help those they serve achieve a stronger, more resilient foundation for whole body health. 


TRIMMED:
- It’s easy to forget about feet or stop taking care of them when they aren't visible.

- Before we can begin exploring a topic, we must first 1) be aware of the topic, and 2) view the topic as relevant or important enough to deserve our time and energy. 

- Daily session that includes foot reconditioning, balance training, squat restoration and time on the floor







