11. INCENTIVES

"Show me the incentive and I'll show you the outcome"

The quote above is by Charlie Munger and serves as a great reminder that when trying to make sense of people's actions, understanding incentives can offer great clarity. 

Incentives are the hidden forces that govern human behaviour. 

Whether obvious or hidden, they are always present and their impacts are significant.


“It’s difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it”

The above quote by Upton Sinclair illustrates an important point. 

In the legacy paradigm of disease care, professionals are financially incentivized to treat symptoms of disease with complex, expensive interventions that are often ineffective or worse when long term consequences are honestly considered. 

The incentive to treat without regard for effectiveness or long term results is a perverse incentive causing wasted resources, and an implicit dis-incentive to help people understand and resolve issues by addressing the root cause. 

Until we acknowledge that current reality, we won't be able to move beyond it.


Incentives are about more than money but monetary incentives are important because health professionals must generate income in order to pay their bills, feed their families and run viable business ventures. 

The desire to help others, to do what's right and to be effective is strong, but when placed in opposition to financial incentives, professionals often default to doing what makes them money regardless of their desire to help people improve their health.


Designing aligned incentives within foot health is actually very simple. 

If the footwear we wear is the largest determinant of our foot health and everyone wears shoes, it makes sense for health professionals to be financially rewarded for recommending natural footwear. 

This framework is ethical, effective and aligns the interests of all parties involved (patient, provider, footwear seller). It's a win-win-win situation.


The uncomfortable truth is that many disease care professionals specialized in treating foot problems are incentivized to remain ignorant. 

If we want to change how disease care professionals understand foot health, we must first help them change how their salaries are earned. 

Humans are naturally dis-incentivized from believing anything that is in opposition to their current beliefs, especially if a lot of time, energy and money was spent acquiring those beliefs. 

Disease care degrees creates a false sense of confidence and a blind spot for many professionals. 

The sunken costs of acquiring those degrees also creates strong friction to dropping knowledge learned that may no longer be useful. 


Adopting an effective foot health protocol allows us to create new economic incentives around footwear and imposes new social and moral incentives that affect our reputation. 

The practice of healthcare offers us new psychological incentives contributing to increased satisfaction and meaning in our work because we are helping people improve their health instead of simply treating symptoms without addressing the issue. 

Misaligned incentives are no longer acceptable.


Footwear recommendations are the domain of modern day health professionals and footwear retailers and manufacturers would be wise to partner with professionals and compensate them for recommending footwear that aligns with foot health. 

Footwear commissions can become a significant revenue stream for health professionals. 

Getting paid to recommend natural footwear is ethical, upholds our duty of care and aligns with better foot health. 

It's time to create financial incentives that reward professional effectiveness and serve to replace existing incentives that reward ineffective, expensive, complex treatments that fail to address the root cause of foot problems.


