9. APPLICATION

Knowledge of Apollo is useless unless the software is applied.

We don't want you to trust us that this protocol is effective, we want you to run the software and validate it yourself

Knowledge refers to the acquisition of information and facts, while wisdom involves the application of knowledge along with experience, insight and good judgement. 

Knowlefge of the core elements is essential and wisdom is required for effective application.

The three core elements of Apollo: time preference, footwear and a daily session.

All core elements must be included for effectiveness but application will vary greatly ans should always be individualized

While a 55 year old woman with bunions will apply the protocol differently than a professional athlete seekng to optimize performance and durability, they must both include and respect the core protocol elements for optimal results. 

By lowering our time preference, eliminating unnatural shoes and consistently showing up for a daily upgrade session, we have all of the requires ingredients. 

What we choose to wear on our feet and what we do in our daily session matter much less than the fact that we aren’t wearing unnatural shoes and that we are showing up everyday to do something that offers our body natural inputs.


RAW:

- While effectiveness requires these core elements, applications of the protocol will and should vary widely and optimal application requires wisdom.
- A physiotherapist will apply the protocol differently than a footwear manufacturer. 
- A strength coach will apply the protocol differently than a podiatrist. 
- Two podiatrists might also apply the protocol very differently from each other and the same podiatrist may apply the protocol in radically different ways with different patients.

This protocol consists of 3 simple elements. The first element is to adopt a long term mindset, focus on inputs and trust the process of adaptation. The second element is to eliminate unnatural footwear and choose to wear natural footwear when we want to protect our feet. The third element is to adopt a daily practice of at least 10 minutes which includes elements of reconditioning, balance training, squat restoration and time on the ground. This simple protocol ensures a robust array of natural inputs that will recalibrate the lower body over time and facilitate the prevention and resolution of foot dysfunction. 

