1. INTRODUCTION

Resolving lower extremity dysfunction has come to rely almost exclusively on disease care experts serving as trusted authorities to diagnose and treat problems. 

The increasing prevelance of lower extremity dysfunction is a direct result of insufficient education to help individuals make better lifestyle choices.

Through simple observation, it's clear that 90% of shod humans are unknowingly wearing shoes that actively disable and damage their feet. 

This lack of awareness results in 75% of shod individuals experiencing foot pain at some point in their lives which for some can be debilitating.

The unecessary suffering and significant economic and social burdens created by a lack of basic health education is a problem we seek to solve with this protocol

Disease care incentivizes a palliative approach which focuses on short term symptom mitigation while ignoring the root causes of lower extremity dysfunction.


The word radical comes the Latin word radicalis which meant "relating to a root". 

In our context, radical signifies a reversion back to first principles and focusing on the root cause of foot dysfunction. 

Radical also makes reference to the fact that a simple approach built on first principles is a radical shift from our current paradigm of complex, ineffective treatments that offer short term benefits while ignoring long term unintended negative consequences. 

Treating symptoms of disease while ignoring the root cause is no longer meeting a reasonable standard of care.


Credentialed professionals are efficient in providing care but fail to acknowledge that the their competency is in techniques that are now outdated and ineffective in achieving positive health outcomes in the long term. 

An empowering, action oriented protocol based in first principles of biology is needed instead of trust in a disease care system that no longer serves the interests of indivduals.


Our feet abide by the same biological axioms as any other body part yet they are currently treated in a fundamentally different way. 

If the natural default state of the human body is to be free of pain and dysfunction, why then do 75%+ of shod people develop foot pain over the course of their life? 

If the body is self healing and self organizing, the only answer to this problem is that unnatural inputs are disrupting the healthy biology we are each given at birth. 

With a basic understanding of foot function and the observation that over 90% of modern humans are wearing unnatural footwear, it becomes painfully obvious why so many people develop dysfunctional feet.

