7. Unnatural inputs

As the old saying goes - a problem full understood is mostly solved

By understanding the consequences of wearing unnatrual footwear and spending excessive amounts of time sitting in a chair, individuals are empowered to make healthier lifestyle choices.

Limit exposure to unnatural shoes and chair sitting to 10% or less of waking hours

Switch to natural footwear

Spend more time walking, standing and on the ground

The primary unnatural inputs causing issues in the lower body are unnatural footwear and excessive chair sitting time.


OLD

The effects of unnatural footwear and chair sitting on the health and function of the lower extremity is currently widely underappreciated and misunderstood by individuals and professionals.

If we accept that foot function is the output of demands imposed on our lower body and that footwear is the primary constraint on demands imposed on our feet, we can deduce that the footwear we wear is the primary determinant of our foot health.

Wearing shoes that impose unnatural demands on our feet will logically result in unnatural foot function over time. 

Wearing shoes that respect the natural shape and function of our feet will enable natural inputs and thus preserve and develop natural foot function over time.


While footwear was initially a form of clothing worn by humans to protect their feet from the environmental dangers like sharp objects or temperature extremes, footwear today has become largely a fashion consideration.

95% of shod humans today are wearing unnatural shoes that disable, deform and damage their feet. 

By understanding unnatural footwear to be the primary cause of foot dysfunction, individuals are empowered to implement an immediate solution. 

By spending less time wearing unnatural footwear, individuals reduce the primary source of unnatural inputs and their biology immediately begins to heal and recalibrate.

When protecting feet from the environment, natural footwear should be worn. 

Natural footwear is defined as footwear that is foot shaped, flat, flexible, has a thin sole and is fixed to the foot.

It is best practice for health professionals to recommend natural footwear and a reduction in chair sitting to individuals they serve. 

When it comes to preventing and resolving foot dysfunction, natural footwear is the most powerful and essental tool to make long term progress. 

The second principle of Apollo is to reduce time spent in unnatural footwear and to reduce time spent sitting in chairs.

Opting for natural footwear when seeking to protect feet from the environment and spending time on the ground instead of in chairs is the path to healthier feet.


TO EDIT

Prolonged periods of chair sitting creates muscular imbalances and reduces rotational capacity at the hip joint which has a direct negative impact on foot function.

Rotation at the hip is required to optimally orient the bones of the foot into a stable arch position. 

By opting for standing, kneeling or spending time on the ground, we replace unnatural inputs (lack of motion) with natural ones. 














