Trimmed from Whitepaper v0.97:


ABSTRACT

Disease care professionals are trained to offer palliative interventions

Reducing exposure to unnatural footwear and chair sitting while simultaneously increasing movement diversity effectively restores function

Simple, effective lower extremity protocol would allow individuals to reclaim responsibility for taking care of their feet without depending on professionals who have been trained to treat symptoms of foot dysfunction without addressing the root causes

A paradigm shift is currently underway in how we think of health broadly and foot health specifically. Instead of simply diagnosing problems and treating symptoms (disease care), professionals are beginning to help their patients and clients take better care of themselves (healthcare). 

This shift is a much needed change to help us move towards better health. Optimal health is the output of exposing our bodies to natural behaviours that align with our biology. 

Within the domain of foot health, it is the duty of care and responsibility of health professionals to protect those they serve from the harmful effects of unnatural footwear. 

- By increasing awareness, respecting first principles, focusing on the essentials and designing aligned incentives, we have an opportunity to prevent and resolve the vast majority of foot dysfunction. 

We believe a low time preference, reducing time spent in unnatural footwear annd chair sitting, and a consistent daily session are fundamental requirements to restore healthy feet and a resilient, functional lower body.

---
---
---

1. INTRODUCTION

This health protocol aims to improve awareness of fundamental principles that govern human biology to help individuals and professionals improve lower body health. 

If we view behaviours as software, this is free open source health software for human hardware. Humans who wish to reclaim responsibility for their health can run this software to protect and optimize their lower body hardware. 

Such a protocol would allow any individual to reclaim responsibility for their lower body health.

We have created free open source behavioural software that empowers individual to restore lower extremity health and reduce their risk of injury.

Through simple observation, it's clear that a high majority of shod humans are unknowingly wearing shoes that actively disable and damage their feet. 

This lack of awareness results in 75% of shod individuals experiencing foot pain at some point in their lives which for some can be debilitating.

Palliative interventions by their very definition cannot achieve positive health outcomes

Credentialed professionals must realize that efficiency without effectiveness is unacceptable

Disease care providers focus on efficiency but fail to acknowledge a lack of effectiveness in achieving long term outcomes.

Competency is in techniques that are now outdated and ineffective in achieving positive health outcomes in the long term. 

An open source protocol is needed instead of trust in a disease care system that no longer serves the interests of indivduals.

Our feet abide by the same biological axioms as any other body part yet they are currently treated in a fundamentally different way.

The natural default state of the human body is to be free of pain and dysfunction, why then do 75%+ of shod people develop foot pain over the course of their life? 

If the body is self healing and self organizing, the only answer to this problem is that unnatural inputs are disrupting the healthy biology we are each given at birth. 

With a basic understanding of foot function and the observation that over 90% of modern humans are wearing unnatural footwear, it becomes painfully obvious why so many people develop dysfunctional feet.

The unecessary suffering and economic burden created by a lack of basic health education is a problem we seek to solve with this protocol.

Disease care incentivizes a palliative approach focuseD on short term symptom mitigation while ignoring the root causes of lower extremity dysfunction.

We have developed an empowering, effective, practical protocol based in first principles of biology to replace ineffective medical intervention. 

By making this information freely available, we hope to mitigate the epidemic of lower extremity problems which is a direct result of insufficient education and a disease care system that fails to address root causes of dysfunction.

---
---
---

2. AWARENESS


Awareness that unnatural footwear and excessive chair sitting have direct negative consequences on the health and function of the lower extremity.

Awareness that achieveing optimal lower body health is accessible to individuals and incredibly simple.

Interventions that target isolated components will be ineffective and likely result in long term unintended systemic consequences.


Apollo is a peer validated proof of work health protocol for the lower extremity.

The longer we have neglected our health, the longer period will be required to restore it.

Awareness that taking care of ourselves is the ultimate form of Healthcare

Awareness of fundamental principles that govern how our bodies adapt

Awareness that caring for our biology is a much better path than neglecting our bodies and waiting for it to break down.

“out of sight, out of mind”

Because feet constantly covered with shoes it’s easy to lose touch with the importance, and complexity of our feet let alone care for them. 

While feet are essential sensors for efficient locomotion, they remain grossly misunderstood by individuals and health professionals alike. 

Each foot contains 26 bones, 33 joints each with 6 degrees of freedom and in the arch of the foot alone, there are 10 muscles and 4 layers of tissue. 

Nature doesn't make mistakes and the level of complexity tells us that our feet are designed to be dynamic and capable of highly complex patterns of motion. 

As Leonardo da Vinci once said, “the human foot is a masterpiece of engineering and a work of art”. 


Everything begins with awareness ansd to fully understand a problem is to know what to do about it.

Doing something about a problem that is not fully understood is inviting chaos and unintended consequence. 

In order to remain mobile, the articulations must articulate and in order to remain strong, the muscles must be loaded.

By observing that 95% of shod people wear shoes that damage their feet and understanding 75% of people develop foot issues over the course of a lifetime, our cultural blind spot around feet becomes glaringly obvious.

It’s time to bring our appreciation of feet into alignment with their importancfe and to upgrade our understanding.

As the physical foundation for our bodies and our primary tactile sensor for the world we move upon, feet are a crucially important structure of the human form. 

To neglect our feet is to neglect the very foundation we stand on and require for movement independence.

Simply ask someone suffering from debilitating foot pain how important feet are and they will tell you that it’s easy to ignore feet until they stop working and we have our primary means of transportation and movement independence taken from us. 


Beyond expanding awareness that feet are important, it's time to acknowledge that we currently have a disease care system that is being mislabeled as healthcare. 

Diagnosing disease and treating symptoms without addressing the root cause has nothing to do with health and is not healthcare. 

In order to remain relevant, professionals must do better and individuals should expect better from those who serve them. 


Awareness that the footwear we choose to wear is the primary determinant of our foot health is essential. 

Awareness that excessive chair sitting time is causing adaptations that harm our lower body function over time.

Without understanding the impact our footwear choices have on our foot health, it’s impossible for us to make wise choices and take care of our feet.


Efficiency means doing things right. 

Effectiveness means doing the right things. 

Many people are investing time, money and energy into improving their foot health but few people are being effective. 

Effectiveness in preventing and resolving foot dysfunction comes from consistently applying 3 core elements and by doing so, the lower body receives correct inputs that facilitate a restoration of natural health and function. 

By understanding and applying these 3 essential elements, we become empowered to prevent and resolve 99% of foot problems. 

By adopting a long term mindset, protecting ourselves from footwear & chairs and incorporating a consistent daily session, we gain the ability to respond to any foot challenges we may encounter. 

We become empowered to take responsibility for our foot health.


Helping individuals reduce unnatural inputs while increasing natural inputs is the work of the effective healthcare professional. 

Through this paper we seek to present this education framework as a new gold standard in foot health education and a template that can be adopted by health professionals in all domains to help those they serve achieve a stronger, more resilient foundation for whole body health. 

It’s easy to forget about feet or stop taking care of them when they aren't visible.

Before we can begin exploring a topic, we must first 1) be aware of the topic, and 2) view the topic as relevant or important enough to deserve our time and energy. 

Daily session that includes foot reconditioning, balance training, squat restoration and time on the floor

---
---
---

3. PARADIGM SHIFT

As we move into a world built on sound money, we will naturally observe a collective shift from high to low time preference when making decisions.

Developing better health is a long term endeavour that can only be mastered through a low time preference approach.

We predict that individuals will gradually opt out of centralized disease care and shift into decentralized healthcare by accepting responsibility for their well being. 

By challenging outdated systems, we’re invited to explore new ways of thinking and novel ways of approaching problems.

Taking care of biology is the ultimate form of healthcare.

Apollo can be applied as a core element of physical education in grade school. 

This is how true change can manifest.

Within the realm of professional education, 

Centralized disease care to decentralized healthcare

From trust in experts to responsibility 

Within disease care, individuals neglect their health and trust professionals and companies to help ease pain with short sighted interventions.

Within health care, individuals reclaim responsibility for their well being by understanding principles and applying them to live in alignment with their biology.


Today's predominant system of disease care revolves around the diagnosis of disease and treatment of symptoms. 

Disease care professionals are trained and financially incentivized to treat symptoms without addressing the root cause of dysfunction. 

Even with good people and good intentions, this system is disempowering, myopically focused on short term suppression of symptoms, and built on a framework of financial incentives that reward intervention instead of positive long term health outcomes. 

While many professionals working in disease care view themselves as healthcare professionals, the truth is that disease care has nothing to do with health and disease care professionals are in fact not trained to address root causes while being financially dis-incentivized to help patients heal.


Time preference is a term from economics used to describe the relative value we place on the present moment versus the future. 

Someone with a high time preference cares more about the present than the future and someone with a low time preference prioritizes the future over the present moment. 

For example, when offered a drug that will reduce pain in the short term but will create more problems in the long term, someone with high time preference will choose to feel better right now regardless of the long term consequences whereas someone with a low time preference will accept feeling less comfortable in the present moment in order to have a better long term outcome. 

Disease care has a high time preference bias. 

Disease care offers interventions that manage symptoms in the short term while creating unintended negative consequences in the long term. 

A blind spot about long term consequences is created because research measures short term effects while rarely (if ever) measuring long term issues that are created.


Improving one's health is a long term endeavour that requires a low time preference. 

Being healthy requires us to forfeit the donut today in order to have better health tomorrow. 

It requires us to forfeit the pain medication today so we can continue receiving the crucial feedback loop of pain and engage with the process of rebuilding capacity. 

The paradigm shift from disease care to health care is fundamentally a return to low time preference thinking and the adoption of a long term mindset. 

In contrast to disease care, health care revolves around education and empowering individuals to take better care of themselves. 

By helping people understand the root cause of problems and offering effective guidance, healthcare empowers individuals to reclaim responsibility for their well being by enabling them to make lifestyle choices that support better health. 

Healthcare places primary responsibility back on the patient/client, who are the only ones capable of making better daily decisions.


Disease care creates dependence on "experts" who must intervene with short term measures to ease pain which comes at the expense of long term health. 

Health care fosters independence by offering individuals an increased ability to respond effectively to the challenges they face. 

Instead of focusing on pain, the objective is to improve long term function and resilience while understanding that pain is our most powerful guide along the process of healing. 

In our instant gratification culture, disease care appeases to our desire to take shortcuts and to feel better today regardless of consequences that may come tomorrow. 

Health care is a return to rational discipline and asks us to prioritize the future over the present moment. 

Health is a long term endeavor and requires a long term mindset if we are to meaningfully improve our well being. 

Focusing on eliminating the root cause of problems instead of simply treating the symptoms is a return to effectiveness. 

Helping people take better care of themselves requires us to educate our patients about eliminating unnatural inputs causing issues and reincorporating natural inputs that nudge our bodies to adapt back to default, healthy settings.

---
---
---

4. FIRST PRINCIPLES

Thinking from first principles allows us to consider long term unintended consequences that result from the disease care approach of optimizing solely around pain reduction.

If we want to restore natural lower extremity function, we must eliminate unnatural inputs and allow our bodies to adapt accordingly.  


---
---
---

5. TIME PREFERENCE

A high time preference is a present moment bias, and a low time preference is a future oriented bias.

Learning about how the human body works, how it adapts and changing behaviours to align with biology is a low time preference endeavour.

Enduring discomfort today and spending time making sustainable changes for better function tomorrow is the path to develop better health.

The process of improving lower body health requires time.

The largest influence on time preference is the hardness of the money individuals use to save their time.


---
---
---

6. SYSTEMS THINKING

The human body is an adaptive system with incredibly complex, efficient and effective feedback loops. 

unintentional malware: unnatural shoes, chair sitting

begin by removing the error codes. The unintentional behavioural malware

Understanding the human foot requires us to consider the entire lower body (navel and below) as an integrated system consisting of multiple interdependent subsystems.

This perspective is well articulated through the musculoskeletal concept of regional interdependence which states that seemingly unrelated impairments in a remote anatomical region may contribute to or be associated with a primary complaint. 

Instead of thinking about what things can be done to a specific body part, we must consider the broader set of factors and interactions contributing to a certain outcome. 

By applying systems thinking to lower extremity health, we consider the lower body as an integrated system whereby no singular element of the system can be meaningfully optimized in isolation of other elements. 

Our feet, ankles, knees, hips and pelvic control are a tightly interlinked network of subsystems that must be considered together in order to effectively resolve dysfunction at the feet. 

A foot conversation must always be a lower body conversation. Isolating the foot is ineffective and futile.

---
---
---

7. UNNATURAL INPUTS

Opting for natural footwear protecting feet from the environment and spending time on the ground instead of in chairs is the path to a healthier lower body. 

When it comes to preventing and resolving lower extremity function and foot health specifically, natural footwear is the most powerful and essential tool to make long term progress. The second principle of Apollo is to reduce time spent in unnatural footwear and to reduce time spent sitting in chairs.

Before adding natural inputs to the lower body system, it is wise to first understand and eliminate the root causes of lower extremity dysfunction.

The clothing we cover our feet with is the primary determinant of our foot health.

The alternative to unnatural footwear that damages our feet is natural footwear that respects the shape and function of our feet.

The shoes we choose to wear have profound impacts on our foot health, movement patterns and the function of our entire lower body system. 

Until we view the foot as an important and adaptable structure, we have little reason to pay attention to them or to consider the effects that our footwear might be having on the health and function of our feet. 

If we aspire to prevent and resolve foot problems, we need to begin using our feet as they are adapted to be used. 

Eliminating unnatural footwear and choosing to wear natural footwear that respects the function of our biology is the first step to restoring strong, healthy feet.

If you want healthy feet, reduce time in shoes that offer artificial support, inihibit motion of your foot joints, or elevate your heel.

When optimizing the lower body system, we begin by subtracting unnatural inputs that are creating negative adaptations.

Reduce unnatural shoes and chair sitting to 10% or less of waking hours. Protect feet with natural footwear

By reducing exposure to unnatural shoes and chair sitting, individuals offer the body protection from damage.

The majority of shod humans currently wear shoes that disable and damage their feet, and 75% develop foot issues over the course of a lifetime.

If we accept that foot function is the output of demands imposed on our lower body and that footwear is the primary constraint on demands imposed on our feet, we can deduce that the footwear we wear is the primary determinant of our foot health.

Wearing shoes that impose unnatural demands on our feet will logically result in unnatural foot function over time. 

Wearing shoes that respect the natural shape and function of our feet will enable natural inputs and thus preserve and develop natural foot function over time.

While footwear was initially a form of clothing worn by humans to protect their feet from the environmental dangers like sharp objects or temperature extremes, footwear today has become largely a fashion consideration.

95% of shod humans today are wearing unnatural shoes that disable, deform and damage their feet. 

By understanding unnatural footwear to be the primary cause of foot dysfunction, individuals are empowered to implement an immediate solution. 

By spending less time wearing unnatural footwear, individuals reduce the primary source of unnatural inputs and their biology immediately begins to heal and recalibrate.

When protecting feet from the environment, natural footwear should be worn. 


Prolonged periods of chair sitting creates muscular imbalances and reduces rotational capacity at the hip joint which has a direct negative impact on foot function.

Rotation at the hip is required to optimally orient the bones of the foot into a stable arch position.

By opting for standing, kneeling or spending time on the ground, we replace unnatural inputs (lack of motion) with natural ones. 


---
---
---


8. NATURAL INPUTS

A 10 minute walk around the block is a great start


---
---
---

9. APPLICATION

By lowering time time preference, reducing unnatural inputs and consistently increasing natural inputs through daily behaviours, individuals are empowered to make progress.

Health professionals are expected to lead by example in their own behaviours. A doctor who smokes cigarettes while advising patients not to smoke compromises their integrity and reputation. In a similar manner, a health professional who wears unnatural footwear and spend the majority of their time sitting in chairs also compromise their integrity and reputation. 

A 55 year old woman with bunions will apply the protocol differently than a professional athlete seeking to optimize performance and durability, but they must both include and respect all three principles for optimal results.

Successful application comes from consistently applying the principles. 

While effectiveness requires these core elements, applications of the protocol will and should vary widely and optimal application requires wisdom.

A physiotherapist will apply the protocol differently than a footwear manufacturer. 

A strength coach will apply the protocol differently than a podiatrist. 

Two podiatrists might also apply the protocol very differently from each other and the same podiatrist may apply the protocol in radically different ways with different patients.

This protocol consists of 3 simple elements. The first element is to adopt a long term mindset, focus on inputs and trust the process of adaptation. The second element is to eliminate unnatural footwear and choose to wear natural footwear when we want to protect our feet. The third element is to adopt a daily practice of at least 10 minutes which includes elements of reconditioning, balance training, squat restoration and time on the ground. This simple protocol ensures a robust array of natural inputs that will recalibrate the lower body over time and facilitate the prevention and resolution of foot dysfunction. 

Knowledge of Apollo is useless unless the software is applied.

Consistently showing up for a daily upgrade session, we have all of the requires ingredients. 

What we choose to wear on our feet and what we do in our daily session matter much less than the fact that we aren’t wearing unnatural shoes and that we are showing up everyday to do something that offers our body natural inputs.

A marker of professional integrity is leading by example and applying behaviours being recommended in their own lives.

As a pro, apply on yourself first to validate it. Apply in your approach 

We expect health professionals to experientially apply and validate this protocol to verify safety effectiveness before recommending it to those they serve.

By applying protocol principles in their own lives, health professionals are able to continually validate effectiveness and guide those they serve from a place of experiential understanding and with integrity. 

Just like a doctor compromises their integrity by smoking cigarettes while advising patients not to smoke cigarettes, health professionals are expected to live in alignment with the advice they offer to others. 

By applying protocol principles in their own lives, health professionals will experience applications challenges themselves and be able to share solutions and ideas with those they serve. 

The ethical thing to do as a professional is to apply the protocol on yourself first. Validate that it is sound and you can then teach it to those you serve from a place of integrity. Lead by example. Speak about the protocol and how to apply it from experience, not just a theoretical understanding. Practice what you preach

Save in hard money, reduce unnatural inputs and increase natural inputs. 


---
---
---

10. CONSENSUS

Truth by distributed consensus. 

Peer validated via whitepaper endorsements. 

It's essential to align our actions with biological axioms that govern how human physiology adapts to inputs it receives.


---
---
---

11. Incentives

Educated individuals will no longer see value in high time preference interventions or products that disrupt natural function of their lower body.

Misaligned incentives are no longer acceptable.

Within a culture of responsibility where individuals are informed and understand fundamental principles, social and monetary incentives will naturally develop. When individuals understand the damaging effects of unnatural footwear, they will naturally seek alternative footwear that supports foot health and lower extremity function. Partnership opportunities naturally develop between health professionals and businesses that offer products and services that align with their approach. A simple example of this would be a relationship whereby a natural footwear retailer compensates health professionals for footwear referalls. This framework is ethical, effective and aligns the interests of all parties involved (individual, prodessional, footwear seller).

Footwear recommendations are the domain of modern day health professionals and footwear retailers and manufacturers would be wise to partner with professionals and compensate them for recommending footwear that aligns with foot health. 

Because most humans wear shoes, footwear commissions can become a significant revenue stream for health professionals. 

Getting paid to recommend natural footwear is ethical, upholds our duty of care and aligns with better lower extremity health.


---
---
---

12. CONCLUSION

Share the software with friends, family, professionals in your network

Help people understand and download the software

Support products and services that help individuals successfully apply protocol principles in your life. Share the protocol with friends, family and professionals in your network


---
---
---

RESPONSIBILITY (non existent as a section heading as of v0.95)

Developing better health requires each of us to accept responsibility for taking care of our bodies. 

The responsibility of health professionals is to offer truthful, applicable guidance to the individuals they serve. 

With improved awareness, we collectively gain the ability to respond effectively to foot health challenges we may face. 

This whitepaper aims to improve awareneness of foot health fundamentals so every human has access to truthful, simple information that can be applied in day to day life.


The ability to effectively respond to a problem first requires an understanding of the problem. 

It is the responsibility of individuals to learn how their body adapts and functions and to make apropriate footwear choices. 

It is the responsibility of health professionals to understand how the body functions so they can effectively guide those they serve towards making better lifestyle choices. 


Health professional is defined as any individual who earns the majority of their income from helping others improve their health. 

It is the responsibility of these individuals to be informed, and to offer guidance that helps those they serve make better decisions in their day to day lives. 

Based on that definition, health professionals include movement coaches, yoga instructors, physicians, physiotherapists, chiropractors, massage therapists, podiatrists and many more professions who aspire to empower those they serve with information that guides healthy behaviour change.

In order to preserve a reputation of competence, disease care professionals must shift their approach to align with the health care paradigm that has emerged.

Professionals must elevate their understanding of feet in order to effectively guide patients as they respond to the challenge of foot dysfunction.

--

INPUTS (non existent as a section heading as of v0.95)

- “we are how we move”

- The health and function of our bodies is a direct reflection of how we use our biology.

- According to first principles, when the body is exposed to natural inputs, the result is natural outputs.

- Converselt when the body is exposed to unnatural inputs, the result is unnatural outputs.

- Health and resilience are natural outputs.

- Sustained pain and disease are unnatural outputs. 

- the two primary natural inputs required by the lower body for foot health are varied movement and load.

- Our primitive biology is optimized for a world where humans are barefoot, walk extended distances each day on foot and are consistently exposed to a wide variety of surfaces.

- These natural behaviours create varied loads and movement positions which serve as inputs for our lower body system.

- The mismatch between the modern world today and the primitive world to which human biology is adapted for is what creates problems.

- The human body adapts impartially and unapologetically to the inputs provided to it and doesn’t care if the result is pain and dysfunction.

- Human feet require varied movement and load in the lower body to remain functional, strong and resilient.

- Despite being an incredibly important topic to understand as children, most are tought very little about health and how to care for our biology through the lifestyle we choose to live.

- Unnatural shoes and excessive chair sitting disrupt exposure to varied movement and load that are required for healthy feet.

--
DUTY OF CARE (non existent as a section heading as of v0.95)


It is the duty of health professionals to effectively care for those they serve to the best of their ability.

Caring means understanding the most current information and protecting individuals from behaviours that harm their health. 

By providing truthful, applicable education, we enable them to make wise choices and take better care of their bodies. 

Within the context of foot health, our primary duty is to protect them from the dangers of unnatural footwear that disables, deforms and damages their feet. 

Failing to advocate natural footwear is a failure in upholding our duty of care. 

When we learn better, we do better. 

Regardless of our current perspective when it comes to feet, we owe it to those we serve and are duty bound to constantly upgrade our understanding and to base our guidance on the most truthful protocol that respects fundamental laws of biology.

As a community of health professionals, it's our duty to do better and to protect our patients from the harmful effects of unnatural footwear instead of simply treating the symptoms created by shoes that disrespect our biology.


- Best practices are a standard or a set of guidelines that are known to produce good outcomes if followed. 

- Assessing our patients barefoot, educating them about natural footwear and warning them about the dangers of unnatural footwear are the simple yet effective best practices that enable us to achieve good outcomes. 

It’s no longer acceptable to ignore foot health. 

A simple 60 second conversation can dramatically change a persons understanding of how to care for their feet and empower them to protect themselves from potentially debilitating foot problems in future.
--


8. RESPONSIBILITY

- The price is health is responsibility. 

- Individuals must accept that their personal health is their responsibility 

- In order to do better as a community of professionals, we must first unlearn information that no longer aligns with healthcare, and update our understanding so we can build our ability to effectively guide those we serve towards better health. 

- Within the context of foot health, we must understand the effects of our footwear choices on foot health and advocate wearing footwear that supports a healthy foundation. 

- As individuals, our health is fundamentally our responsibility. 

- As health professionals, our responsibility to those we serve is to offer truthful, helpful, applicable education that empowers them to make wise lifestyle choices.

--
Inputs (formerly 5)

5. INPUTS

The function, capacity and health of our body at any moment is a predictable and direct reflection of the inputs we provide it. 

This principle applies equally to feet whereby the function and health of our feet is the resulting output of the inputs we provide our lower body.

Strong, stable, adaptable, resilent feet are the result of natural inputs.

Weak, unstable, stiff, injury prone feet are the result of unnatural inputs.

Natural inputs align with and optimize our biology while unnatural inputs violate and disable our biology. 

While health is important to understand in order to live a pleasant life, most people understand very little about how to care for their bodies.

Without understanding how the body adapts, individuals are not capable of making wise choises when it comes to foot health.

In order to optimize foot health, individuals must reduce unnatural inputs and increase natural inputs.

By reducing exposure to unnatural footwear and time spent sitting in chairs, the primary root causes of foot dysfunction are removed.

By increasing movement and load variety through acitivites like walking, balance training, time spent barefoot and time on the ground, natural foot function can be restored. 

Developing better foot health is the process of reducing unnatural behaviors and adopting a lifestyle rich in natural inputs so our biology can begin adapting back to default settings. 

---
---
---




